

=== PAGE 222 ===

CHAPTER
9
Multi-Valued Dimensions
and Bridges
A crucial feature of every example in the first eight chapters of this book has gone
unmentioned. Each and every dimension attribute has participated in a simple one-to-
many relationship with every fact. This essential characteristic has allowed dimensions to
be arranged around fact tables in the neat and powerful star configuration with which you
are now familiar.
The real world, of course, is not always neat. Real-world complexity sometimes makes it
impossible to model a process in this manner. This chapter explores two such challenges:
• Multi-valued dimensions occur when a fact table row may need to refer to more
than one row in a dimension table.
• Multi-valued attributes occur when a dimension row needs to capture multiple
values for a single attribute.
In both cases, a star configuration simply will not support the true complexities of the
process.
The solution to both these challenges introduces a new kind of table, called a bridge.
Think of a bridge table as a double-edged sword. It provides the ultimate power and
flexibility, enabling a wide variety of analytic possibilities. This power comes with significant
costs, and chief among these is risk. Put simply, the presence of a bridge increases the
possibility that the schema can be misused, producing inaccurate results.
The specter of this risk is so great that many shops will refuse to consider using a bridge
at all. This rejection, however, may severely cripple the analytic capabilities of a dimensional
solution. Alternatives are available, but their analytic flexibility is limited. Before dismissing
the bridge out of hand, you and your colleagues must understand it fully. Only then can
you make an informed decision that balances the power and risk of the various options.
This discussion will begin by calling to the fore the previously implied one-to-many
relationship of most dimension tables to the facts. The challenges of multi-valued dimension
tables and multi-valued dimension attributes will then be studied in turn. You will learn the
195

=== PAGE 223 ===

196 PART III Dimension Design
limitations of trying to address these challenges with a standard design, how a bridge can
solve the problem, and the potential consequences. You will also be provided with techniques
to mitigate such consequences, and challenged to think about slow-change processing in a
new light.
Standard One-to-Many Relationships
Until now, each star schema you have seen in this book has been characterized by a distinctive
and important feature. Every fact has been related to exactly one instance value of each
dimension. In an order_facts table, for example, each order is related to exactly one product.
Looking at these relationships from the opposite direction, it has also been true that each
dimension value may be related to one or more fact table rows.
Putting these characteristics together, we say that dimensions and facts have a one-to-
many relationship. A one-to-many relationship is sometimes called other names, such as
master–detail or parent–child. The fact table is sometimes referred to as a dependent
entity, since its definition depends on the primary keys of other tables. These terms all
indicate the same thing: each fact is related to exactly one row in each dimension table.
Following the conventions of entity-relationship modeling, these standard relationships
might be illustrated in a manner similar to the diagram in Figure 9-1. The crow’s feet at the
end of a line indicate the “many” side of the relationship. This style of diagramming is not
normally used for dimensional modeling but will be useful for some of the issues explored in
this chapter and the next. If you are familiar with IDEF modeling, you may be accustomed to
a similar diagramming style in which solid circles replace the crow’s feet.
In the example, a product may be related to zero or more order_facts, and each order_
facts row must be related to exactly one product. (In the diagram, a solid line emanating
from a table indicates a mandatory relationship, and a dotted line indicates an optional
one, but we will not make further use of this convention.) The same holds true for each of
the other dimension tables in the diagram. Diagrams in this chapter will not illustrate
optionality (dotted lines) but some will indicate cardinality (crow’s feet).
Because each fact table row relates to exactly one row in each dimension table, we
can make a similar observation about the relationship between a fact table row and each
dimension column. For example, if one of the columns of the product table is brand_name,
then we can say that each row of order_facts is related to exactly one brand_name.
DAY PRODUCT SALESPERSON CUSTOMER
ORDER_FACTS
Figure 9-1 One-to-many relationships

=== PAGE 224 ===

Chapter 9 Multi-Valued Dimensions and Bridges 197
III
traP
The standard query pattern introduced early in this book relies heavily on the one-to-
many relationship between facts and dimensions. Recall from Chapter 1 that a typical query
will select one or more dimensions and use them to control the aggregation of facts. For
example:
SELECT
product.brand_name,
sum (order_facts.order_dollars)
FROM
product, order_facts
WHERE
product.product_key = order_facts.product_key
GROUP BY
product.brand_name
This technique works nicely, because each order is related to one and only one brand_name.
Even in the case of an attribute hierarchy snowflake, as described in Chapter 7, this may hold
true. The brand table in Figure 7-5, for example, participates in a parent–child relationship
with product, which in turn participates in a parent–child relationship with the fact table.
Some people like to call this a “grandparent–grandchild” relationship. For every fact, there is
exactly one brand, and queries like the one earlier can accurately group the facts.
This configuration has permeated the first eight chapters of this book and has been quite
handy in its simplicity. Unfortunately, the real world is not always that simple. What happens
when a fact may be related to one or more instances of a dimension? Perhaps more than one
salesperson can collaborate on an order, as depicted in Figure 9-2. This breaks with the
conventions that have been implied to this point, because it means a given fact may have
more than one associated salesperson. How does one design a dimensional model in such a
situation? The fact table cannot hold a foreign key reference to the salesrep table, since there
may be more than one salesperson. Similarly, the salesrep table cannot hold a foreign key
reference to the fact table, since each salesperson may have booked more than one order.
ORDER_FACTS
DAY
SALESREP
?
PRODUCT
CUSTOMER
Some orders have
more than one
salesrep!
Figure 9-2 What happens when more than one salesperson may be involved?

=== PAGE 225 ===

198 PART III Dimension Design
As Chapter 7 hinted, the solution will involve a form of snowflaking. As you will see,
it is possible to meet the requirements of the situation, but doing so will introduce new
complications when it comes to ensuring accurate reporting. As with other design alternatives
in this book, you will need to weigh your options carefully.
Multi-Valued Dimensions
For most stars, all the relationships between dimension tables and fact tables are of the
one-to-many variety. Occasionally, though, you will encounter situations where a given fact
may relate to one or more rows in a dimension table. The situation in Figure 9-2 is a clear
example; each order may have more than one salesperson. Perhaps most orders have only
one, but some have two, three, four, or any number of salespeople associated with them.
The salesrep table is an example of a multi-valued dimension. With respect to a single fact, it
can take on multiple values. A multi-valued dimension does not fit with the established
primary key–foreign key relationship between dimension table and fact table.
One way to solve the problem of the multi-valued dimension is to place more than
one key value in the fact table. This approach effectively flattens the complex relationship
between fact and dimension but is somewhat limited. It renders certain forms of reporting
difficult and only works for a set number of relationships.
An alternative is to bridge the relationship between fact table and dimension table with
a special table, which is fittingly referred to as a bridge table. This approach is more flexible
in terms of the information it can capture and the kinds of reports it can produce, but it
offers its own set of problems. Most significantly, if such a table is not queried correctly,
double-counting may result. Luckily, measures can be taken to avoid this outcome.
Simplifying the Relationship
The simplest way to deal with a multi-valued dimension is to decompose the many-to-many
relationship into two or more one-to-many relationships. This solution makes use of roles,
as covered in Chapter 6. The fact table will have not one relationship to the dimension
table but two or more. For a given fact, each of the relationships will identify exactly one
row in the dimension table.
In the case of collaboration among salespeople, order_facts can be designed with two
salesrep_keys. One is designated as primary, the other as secondary. The resulting design is
depicted in Figure 9-3. The figure depicts two aliases for the single salesrep table. Each is
connected using the appropriate foreign key in the fact table. If only one salesperson is
involved in a particular order, the secondary_salesrep_key will refer to a special row in the
salesrep table for “not applicable,” a technique also described in Chapter 6.
This design appears to solve the problem, but issues are lurking beneath the surface.
First, there are certain forms of reporting that will now be much more complicated. Want
to total up order_dollars for a particular salesperson? You’ll have to filter your query twice,
once for the primary salesperson and once for secondary, and link these filters with “or.”
Want to list all salespeople along with the total order_dollars in which they were involved?
You’ll probably need to query the fact table twice, once grouping order_dollars by the
primary salesperson, and again grouping order_dollars by the secondary salesperson. Then,
you can merge the result sets together. All this becomes more complicated if the fact table
allows for three salespeople, or four, or more.

=== PAGE 226 ===

Chapter 9 Multi-Valued Dimensions and Bridges 199
III
traP
DAY ORDER_FACTS PRIMARY_
SALESREP
day_key
salesrep_key Alias for:
product_key
salesperson_name SALESREP
customer_key .
PRODUCT . Role:
primary_salesrep_key .
Primary
secondary_salesrep_key
. Salesperson
.
.
order_dollars
CUSTOMER . . SECONDARY_
. SALESREP
salesrep_key Alias for:
salesperson_name SALESREP
.
. Role:
.
Secondary
Salesperson
Figure 9-3 Allowing for two salespeople
The second problem is that the solution only allows for a fixed number of relationships.
If there are two salesrep_keys in the fact table, for example, then nothing can be done
when an order comes along with three salespeople. You might anticipate this and include
enough keys for the highest number of collaborators ever encountered, but eventually a
new record will be set.
TIP A multi-valued relationship between fact and dimension table can be resolved by breaking it down
into two or more one-to-many relationships. However, this solution complicates reporting and
supports only a finite number of relationships.
Although imperfect, this solution may be acceptable. If the frequency of collaboration is
rare and can be limited to a fixed number of participants, it may be the right choice. Most
reporting will focus on the primary salesperson, working in the standard way. Skilled analysts
will be called on for the occasional report, which calls for factoring in collaboration. If this is
not satisfactory, however, a bridge table will be required.
Using a Bridge for Multi-Valued Dimensions
In lieu of simplifying a many-to-many relationship, a multi-valued dimension can be
accommodated through the design of a special table called a bridge. This approach is
much more flexible but brings with it the danger of double-counting. It is not possible to
eliminate the risk of double-counting, but it can be limited. If a bridged solution is chosen,
special attention must be given to the behavior of slowly changing dimensions, and it may
be necessary to add yet another table to satisfy the quirks of some software products.
Bridging the Relationship
The multi-valued dimension problem can be solved by developing a group table that sits
between the fact table and the dimension table. Instead of directly referring to the dimension

=== PAGE 227 ===

200 PART III Dimension Design
table, each fact will refer to a single group. The group table is called a bridge, because it links
that fact table with the dimension table. Here’s how it works:
• A group table contains a group_key and a foreign key column referring to the
dimension in question.
• A row is added for each group member. If there are three members of the group,
the group table will have three rows for that group. Each row shares the same
group_key.
• The fact table and the bridge can be joined using the group_key; the bridge table is
joined to the dimension in turn.
If that sounds a bit abstract, an example should help. Figure 9-4 shows a table called
sales_group, which bridges the relationship between order_facts and salesrep. The table
order_facts contains a sales_group_key, which indicates the set of salespeople involved in a
particular order. The table sales_group has one row for each member of the group. Each
row has only two columns: the group_key and the salesrep_key.
Suppose that two salespeople, Ann and Henry, work together to bring in an order. The
salesrep table has rows for Ann and Henry, as you can see in the instance table in the lower
right of the diagram. In order to load the order into the fact table, a group is created for
Ann and Henry—assuming one does not already exist. The group is assigned a group_key.
To make the example easy to read, a value of 1 is used, but the group_key has no intrinsic
significance. There are two rows in the sales_group table for the collaboration between
Ann and Henry. Each row contains the group identifier, 1, and salesrep_key of one of the
participants: 222 for Ann and 333 for Henry. A row can now be loaded into the fact table
for this group, holding the sales_group_key 1.
Bridge
table
DAY ORDER_FACTS
day_key
product_key
SALES_GROUP
customer_key
PRODUCT SALESREP
sales_group_key sales_group_key
.
. salesrep_key salesrep_key
.
order_dollars salesperson_name
CUSTOMER . . . . . region
.
ORDER_FACTS SALES_GROUP SALESREP
day_ product_ customer_ sales_ order_ sales_ salesrep_ salesrep_ salesperson_
region
key key key group_key dollars group_key key key name
2012 3721 4791 1 1,000 1 222 222 Ann Davis East
1 333 333 Henry Perez East
Figure 9-4 A bridge table associates any number of salespeople with an order

=== PAGE 228 ===

Chapter 9 Multi-Valued Dimensions and Bridges 201
III
traP
This design has obvious implications for the ETL process. As noted, the process must
create and manage groupings. Each time a collaboration occurs, it will be necessary to
come up with a group_key in order to load the fact. If the group has collaborated in the
past, the same group_key can be used for the new fact. If it is a new collaboration, a group
key must be assigned, and appropriate rows must be added to the sales_group table.
Unlike the simplification option, this approach can accommodate groups of any size. If
three salespeople collaborate on an order, a group_key is created for the collaboration and
three rows are added to the group—one for each member. If a group of 15 works together,
a group is created and 15 rows are added. A group is also needed when a sale takes place
involving only one salesperson. The group table will contain one row, associating the
group_key with the single group member. Every fact will refer to a group.
This solution makes it easy to address some of the questions that posed challenges
under the design that simplified the relationship. Computing total order dollars for a
salesperson is easy; the salesrep table is constrained for the salesperson in question, and
joined to the group table, which in turn joins to the fact table. Total sales for each
salesperson can be accomplished in the same way, grouping data by salesperson_name.
TIP Compared to a solution that simplifies a many-to-many relationship, using a bridge table offers
increased flexibility and simplifies reporting challenges.
You may have noticed that the relationship between the fact table and the bridge table
in Figure 9-4 is many-to-many. That is not a mistake. If Ann and Henry collaborate again,
the same group number can be used. Group number 1 will have multiple rows in the fact
table, one for each order, and multiple rows in the group table, one for Ann and one for
Henry. This works just fine most of the time but can confuse software tools which assume
every join will leverage a primary key–foreign key association. We will look at what to do if
your modeling, database, or reporting tool balks at this relationship shortly. First, though, it
is necessary to address a more important issue.
Bridges and Double-Counting
While the bridge table offers increased flexibility and simplifies many reporting challenges,
there is a downside (there’s always a downside). By allowing a fact to refer to multiple rows
in a dimension table, you open the door to the possibility of double-counting, triple-
counting, or worse.
NOTE For the sake of simplicity, this book uses double-counting to describe any situation where a fact
may be counted more than once. As you will see, in any particular situation, the error may be more
severe.
In Figure 9-3, for example, the same order is associated with both Ann and Henry. If
you query orders by region, the same order will be counted twice—once for Ann and once
for Henry. If three salespeople had collaborated, the order would be triple-counted, and so
forth. Countermeasures can be employed to reduce the possibility of double-counting, but
sometimes it is precisely what is wanted.

=== PAGE 229 ===

202 PART III Dimension Design
When Double-Counting Is Wanted It may seem nonsensical at first, but sometimes this
double-counting is actually a good thing. For example, it may be useful to have a report
that shows order_dollars by salesperson. Such a report shows the sales volume associated
with each salesperson. In this case, Ann and Henry’s joint order should be counted in both
their results.
This kind of report provides insight into the impact that a particular member of the
dimension table has on the facts. Similar examples might include producing a report
showing the total claim dollars by party, the total number of office visits per medical
diagnosis, and so on. While the fact may be counted more than once, it is legitimately
associated with each dimension instance.
On the other hand, it would be a serious error to take that information and produce a
grand total. Ann and Henry may each have participated in $1,000 worth of orders, but this
does not mean that total order dollars are $2,000. Unfortunately, it is all too easy with most
reporting tools to request a grand total.
TIP When a bridge table is present, each fact may be associated with more than one dimension row. This
makes double-counting a very real possibility. Sometimes this is intended, but it is easy to err in
constructing a query or producing totals in a report.
Avoiding grand totals is not sufficient to stay out of trouble. It is necessary to group
query results by individual members of the dimension table. This is sometimes referred to as
the grain of the dimension table. Grouping results at any other level of summarization may
result in double-counting. For example, Ann and Henry have the same region value in the
salesrep table. The following query joins order_facts to salesrep via the bridge, and groups
by region:
SELECT
salesrep.region,
sum (order_facts.order_dollars)
FROM
salerep, sales_group, order_facts
WHERE
order_facts.sales_group_key = sales_group.sales_group_key AND
sales_group.salesrep_key = salesrep.salesrep_key
GROUP BY
salesrep.region
When the RDBMS executes this query, it will find two rows in the salesrep for the single
order booked by Ann and Henry. In order to join the rows, it will repeat the order, once for
Ann and once for Henry. After that, the aggregation by region will be computed. This
causes Ann and Henry’s joint order to be counted twice within region “East.”
TIP The only safe way to construct an impact report is to group by a column in the dimension that will
have a unique value for each member of the group. Most often, this will be the natural key.

=== PAGE 230 ===

Chapter 9 Multi-Valued Dimensions and Bridges 203
III
traP
The specter of double-counting is enough to send many organizations retreating to the
simplified relationship solution. Where the need is strong enough to warrant the bridge,
however, measures can be taken to reduce the risk. Before looking at them, let’s look at one
adjustment that does not solve the problem.
One well-intentioned impulse is to eliminate the many-to-many relationship between fact
table and bridge by asserting that each group will be used only once. If the same members
collaborate again, a new group will be created. While this does reduce the many-to-many
relationship to a one-to-many relationship, it is a one-to-many relationship going in the wrong
direction. Even if we create a second group when Ann and Henry collaborate again, the order
still refers to two salespeople, and it is still in danger of being double-counted. Worse, the
bridge table is likely to grow very large, and it may even contain more rows than the fact
table. Luckily, other techniques will provide limited success.
Adding an Allocation Factor Sometimes, it is possible to eliminate double-counting
dangers by adding an allocation factor to the bridge table. The allocation factor indicates
what percentage of the associated fact should be credited to each group member. The
example in Figure 9-5 shows an allocation factor in the sales_group table. When Ann and
Henry collaborate, 75 percent of the order_dollars are credited to Ann, and 25 percent to
Henry.
The key to making allocations work lies in how the facts are accessed. It is essential that
the allocation factor is applied to each granular transaction, prior to aggregation. The
query in Figure 9-5, for example, selects the sum (order_dollars * allocation),
DAY ORDER_FACTS
day_key
product_key
SALES_GROUP
customer_key
PRODUCT SALESREP
sales_group_key sales_group_key
.
. salesrep_key salesrep_key
.
allocation salesperson_name
order_dollars
CUSTOMER . . . region
. .
.
ORDER_FACTS SALES_GROUP SALESREP
day_ product_ customer_ sales_ order_ sales_ salesrep_ salesrep_ salesperson_
allocation region
key key key group_key dollars group_key key key name
2012 3721 4791 1 1,000 1 222 .75 222 Ann Davis East
1 333 .25 333 Henry Perez East
SELECT
salesperson_name, SALESPERSON_NAME ORDER_DOLLARS
sum(order_dollars * allocation) ---------------------------------- --------------------------
FROM Ann Davis 750
. Henry Perez 250
.
.
Figure 9-5 An allocation factor can help prevent double-counting

=== PAGE 231 ===

204 PART III Dimension Design
rather than trying to apply an allocation factor to sum(order_dollars). As long as the
allocation is computed correctly, this approach ensures that no order dollars are double-
counted. This works, even if we create a grand total that adds together Ann and Henry’s
orders, or query for allocated order_dollars by region. The allocated amounts will always
aggregate to the total order amount. We can even ensure that the facts are calculated this
way by joining the bridge and the fact table within a view. For queries that do not involve
the salesrep table, however, this view will only add unnecessary overhead.
Allocation looks like the perfect solution but is rarely a valid option. In most situations, an
allocation rule simply does not exist. Determining an allocation factor in a sales situation may
be possible, but what does one do if a healthcare charge has several associated diagnoses? It is
tempting to try to define an allocation rule, but it must be based on real business logic, and
must be approved by representatives of the business users. Many attempts at constructing
allocation factors become bogged down in politics.
On the rare occasion that an allocation factor is available, it may make more sense to
redefine the grain of the fact table rather than build a bridge. For example, in the case of
salesperson collaboration, allocation may be factored in as part of the order entry system. A
fully vetted allocation factor is not only available but is also presented to the ETL process by
the operational source. Instead of designing a bridge with an allocation factor, as in Figure
9-5, it is possible to avoid bridging altogether. This is done by defining the grain of the fact
table as “order lines allocated to salesreps.”
TIP Double-counting can be avoided by adding an allocation to the bridge table and aggregating
allocated facts. Ownership of allocation factors must rest with the business community, not the
technical community. If a clean allocation factor exists, consider the possibility of changing the grain
of the fact table instead.
Some facts cannot be meaningfully allocated. Suppose that Ann and Henry’s $1,000
sale was a single item, perhaps a refrigerator. If the fact table had a column called quantity_
ordered, it would contain the value 1. Allocating this fact produces fractional quantities;
Ann will appear to have sold three quarters of a refrigerator. This may be confusing but is
perhaps tolerable.
Supplementing the Bridge with a Primary Member Another way to avoid the danger of
double-counting is to hide the bridge from inexperienced users. This is done by supplementing
the bridged solution with a simplified solution recognizing only one dimension row. The bridge
is hidden from everyone except carefully trained analysts. In the case of our sales example, such
a solution is depicted in Figure 9-6.
Notice that a new foreign key has been added to the fact table: primary_salesrep_key.
Every order has only one primary salesperson, so this can be used safely to join to salsrep to
order_facts in the standard one-to-many configuration. The crow’s feet are included on the
diagram to drive this point home.
TIP When designing a bridge between a dimension and fact table, supplement it with a direct
relationship that isolates a primary role in a one-to-many relationship. This can be used without
fear of double-counting, although the bridge will be required for some forms of reporting.

=== PAGE 232 ===

Chapter 9 Multi-Valued Dimensions and Bridges 205
III
traP
ORDER_FACTS SALES_GROUP PARTICIPATING_
day_key SALESREP Alias for:
sales_group_key
product_key salesrep_key salesrep_key SALESREP
customer_key salesperson_name Role:
sales_group_key region Participant in Sale
primary_salesrep_key
.
.
.
order_dollars PRIMARY_
.
. SALESREP For full analysis.
.
salesrep_key Alias for: Be careful not to
double count.
salesperson_name SALESREP
region Role:
.
. Primary Salesperson
.
For simplified analysis
(without bridge).
No danger of double-
counting.
Figure 9-6 Primary group member can be used for simplified analysis
This solution combines the full flexibility of the bridge with a safe, simplified relationship.
The shaded tables are hidden from end users, who are able to produce basic reports that only
include the primary salesperson. Only trained analysts have access to the bridge table. When
a report is required that factors in collaboration, they will be tapped to produce it.
Other Impacts of Bridging
If a bridged solution is chosen, special attention must be given to the behavior of slowly
changing dimensions. It may also be necessary to add yet another table to the mix in order
to satisfy the quirks of some software products.
Slow Changes As you learned at the end of Chapter 7, snowflake designs require that
special attention be paid to the implications of slow changes. In the case of the dimension
bridge, the implications are straightforward:
• If a bridged dimension row undergoes a type 1 change, it will remain associated
with any existing groups. This behavior is desired.
• If a bridged dimension undergoes a type 2 change, a new group will be required
the next time members collaborate.
In the example from Figure 9-4, if a type 1 attribute for Ann is updated, no further processing
will be required. Ann will remain associated with group 1. On the other hand, if Ann
undergoes a type 2 change, a new row will be created in the salesrep table with a new surrogate
key. The next time Ann and Henry collaborate, it will be necessary to create a new group.
There may also be other situations to consider. If the groupings themselves are
identifiable entities, it is possible to think about the groups themselves as undergoing slow

=== PAGE 233 ===

206 PART III Dimension Design
changes—both to attributes of the group and to membership in the group. If the groups
correspond to a well-defined entity in a source system, the group table may have one or
more descriptive attributes and even a natural key. For example, Ann and Henry’s group in
Figure 9-4 may have a name, such as “Eastern Special Project Team.” This name will repeat
for the two rows that describe the group in the sales_group table. It is possible to allow for
type 1 or type 2 changes to the group attribute. A type 1 change to the group name, for
example, would overwrite both rows in the bridge table. A type 2 change would require
creating a new group with two new rows in the table, one for each group member.
NOTE This situation, and any situation where groups are identifiable entities, would be better modeled
by defining the group as a dimension table, and the members as multi-valued attributes. See the
next section of this chapter for more details.
Changes in membership of closely tracked groups are slightly more complex. Suppose,
for example, that Henry is dumped from the team, and two other salespeople are added. If
the change in group membership is to be handled as a type 1 change, it is necessary to delete
the row for Henry in the group table and add two new rows for the new team members. Like
a type 1 change to a dimension row, this has the effect of associating previously recorded facts
with the new information.
Handling the change in group membership as a type 2 change is slightly more
involved. It will be necessary to establish a new group, and add rows to the bridge table
for each member of the changed group. These changes to group membership may even
be time-stamped, as discussed in Chapter 8, providing a history of point-in-time status of
the group.
Resolving the Many-to-Many Relationship It has already been noted that a dimension
bridge has a many-to-many relationship with the fact table. Although useful in a dimensional
design, this form of relationship is strictly forbidden in the world of entity-relationship
modeling. The principles of normalization call for such relationships to be “resolved.”
Unfortunately, many software products have evolved to assume that this kind of
relationship cannot exist. Database modeling tools, for example, may refuse to allow such a
relationship in a design. SQL-generating business intelligence software may refuse to accept
such relationships when being configured. Even the RDBMS itself may balk at the many-to-
many join. Because these tools define relationships as primary key–foreign key relationships,
they don’t have a way to define a many-to-many relationship.
The bridge table from Figure 9-4 illustrates this conundrum. The relationship between
order_facts and sales_group is many-to-many. Each order may refer to multiple rows in
sales_group, as seen in the picture. If the group collaborates more than once, each group
will refer to multiple orders. When a tool requires each foreign key to refer to the primary
key of another table, there is no way to define this relationship. Although we want to join
using the sales_group_key, it does not serve as a primary key in any table.
One solution is not to declare the relationship to the modeling tool or RDBMS. You can
still issue SQL queries that make use of this relationship, but this may not be an option if
you need to print a diagram showing the relationship, configure a SQL-generating ad hoc
query tool, or configure the database to perform a star join.

=== PAGE 234 ===

Chapter 9 Multi-Valued Dimensions and Bridges 207
III
traP
ORDER_FACTS SALESREP
day_key salesrep_key
product_key SALES_GROUP salesperson_name
customer_key region
. . sales_group_key sales_group_key . . .
.
order_dollars
.
.
.
GROUP_
MEMBERSHIP
This table has
only one
sales_group_key
column!
salesrep_key
allocation
Figure 9-7 Resolving the many-to-many relationship
The solution to this problem is to do what an entity-relationship modeler would do:
construct what they call an “intersect table.” In the case of the dimensional model, this will
have an amusing side effect: it requires you to maintain a group table with only one column,
which is a key value. Figure 9-7 provides an example.
The many-to-many relationship between groups and salespeople is resolved by creating
an intersect table called group_membership. The sales_group table is left with a single
column, the group_key. If you issue the query select * from sales_group, the
contents of this table would appear as a sequence of numbers. Although this may seem silly,
this configuration should satisfy even the most particular of modeling tools. A primary key
can be defined for the group table: sales_group_key. This allows the column to be used as a
foreign key in the fact table.
TIP If you have a software product that will not allow a many-to-many relationship, you can create an
intersect table to resolve it.
If the sales_group table in this revised solution seems extraneous, that’s because it is.
All the information is present in the group_membership table. The sales_group table is
completely redundant. In fact, if you look closely, you will see that the group_membership
table is identical to the original bridge! The necessity of this absurdity stems from software
products that enforce entity-relationship modeling conventions on your dimensional design.
Multi-Valued Attributes
When a dimension attribute may take on more than one value for any given row in
the table, we face a similar design challenge. How does one model an indefinite number
of attribute values for a single row in the dimension? This situation is common.
Customers have multiple phone numbers. Bank accounts have multiple account holders.

=== PAGE 235 ===

208 PART III Dimension Design
Students have multiple guardians. Patients have multiple medical conditions. In each
case, a small subset of the dimension’s attributes may take on more than one value for a
single natural key value.
Attributes that may take on multiple values for a single dimension member are called
multi-valued attributes. For example, in a dimension that captures business customers, it may be
necessary to capture the company’s industry. Each company has a single name, headquarters
location, and chief executive. Most companies are in a single industry, as well, but some are
in two, three, or any number of industries. Figure 9-8 illustrates this challenge. Company C
operates in two industries, and it is possible that other companies may have three, four, or
any number.
Like the multi-valued dimension, this challenge can be resolved by simplifying the
problem or by using a bridge table. Simplifying a multi-valued attribute is often the best
approach but sometimes limits analytic possibilities. Implementing a bridge provides
increased analytic flexibility but introduces risk. If used, the bridge will be placed between
the dimension and an outrigger.
As in the multi-valued dimension scenario, bridging a multi-valued attribute will
introduce the risk of double-counting. Any given fact may link to more than one value for
the bridged attribute, giving rise to the same set of problems encountered earlier. While
the entire dimension table is not at risk this time, the repeating attributes are.
ORDER_FACTS
DAY
CUSTOMER
customer_key
PRODUCT
customer_id
customer_name
c.ustomer_industry ?
.
.
SALESREP
Customer Industry
Company A Manufacturing
Company B Services Some customers
have more than one
Company C Manufacturing industry.
Services
Company D Finance
Figure 9-8 A multi-valued attribute

=== PAGE 236 ===

Chapter 9 Multi-Valued Dimensions and Bridges 209
III
traP
Simplifying the Multi-Valued Attribute
When you are faced with multi-valued attributes, the first option to consider is simplification
of the problem through a technique that is sometimes referred to as “flattening.” Instead of
designing a single column to capture the attribute, you can include two or more columns.
For example, multiple phone numbers for a customer can be captured by designing
separate columns for home phone number, office phone number, and mobile phone
number. The multi-valued attribute is transposed into a repeating attribute.
This approach works best where a limited number of values is acceptable, where each
version corresponds to an easily identifiable role, and where it will not be necessary to filter
or group transactions in a fact table using values that may occur in any of the columns. In
the case of phone numbers, these three conditions may be satisfied. The business is
comfortable with carrying a maximum of three phone numbers in their analysis; each of
the three numbers has a clearly identifiable role—home, office, mobile—and there will not
be a need to search for or group transactions by a phone number that may appear in any of
the three columns.
TIP When faced with a multi-valued attribute, evaluate the possibility of simplifying it into a fixed number
of single-valued attributes. If the repeating attributes will not be used to filter or group query results,
this is the simplest option.
In the example of company industries, simplifying the multi-valued attribute into
a finite number of single-valued attributes is not viable. Illustrated in Figure 9-9, the
dimension table is able to store three industry values for each customer. This solution has
several shortcomings:
• The solution is limited to a specific number of values. Later, we may encounter a
customer that requires more than three industries.
• Filtering a query for a particular industry will require defining multiple conditions,
since the industry in question may appear in any one of the columns.
• Grouping facts by industry will be particularly challenging, since a given industry
may appear in any of the three columns.
The drawbacks to the simplification of a multi-valued
CUSTOMER attribute may seem familiar; they are similar to those
identified when simplifying a many-to-many relationship
customer_key between dimension table and fact table. The alternative is
customer_id also similar: introduction of a bridge table.
customer_name
Using an Attribute Bridge
industry_1
Simplified
multi-valued industry_2 An attribute bridge can be used to model multi-valued
attribute industry_3 attributes in a dimension table. Technically speaking,
.
. . these attributes will not be in the dimension table
itself. Instead, they are placed in an outrigger. A
Figure 9-9 Simplifying a multi-
bridge associates the values, providing a flexible and
valued industry attribute

=== PAGE 237 ===

210 PART III Dimension Design
powerful solution. With this power comes risk; as with the dimension bridge, the
possibility of double-counting exists.
Bridging the Relationship
A multi-valued attribute can be supported using an attribute bridge table, which works in
much the same way as the dimension bridge in the previous section. This time, instead of
placing the bridge between fact table and dimension table, the bridge will be placed
between the dimension table and an outrigger. Here’s how it works:
• The multi-valued attributes are not stored in the dimension table. Instead, they are
placed in a separate table with its own surrogate key. This table will act as an outrigger.
• A bridge table is set up with two columns: a group_key and a second column
referring to the outrigger.
• When a dimension row refers to a specific combination of values in the outrigger,
a group is set up for those values in the bridge table.
• The dimension table and the bridge can be joined using the group_key; the bridge
table is joined to the outrigger in turn.
Once again, this solution is best understood via an example. The design in Figure 9-10
uses a group table to capture multiple industries for each customer. Industry attributes are
not stored in the customer dimension; instead, they are located in an outrigger table called
industry. Customers and industries share a many-to-many relationship, so it is not possible
to design a solution where these tables are joined directly. Instead, a group table is used to
bridge the relationship between a given customer and its industry designations.
To understand the workings of this solution, look at the instance diagrams in the lower
half of the figure. You may recall that Company C participates in two industries: manufacturing
ORDER_FACTS
CUSTOMER
day_key
customer_key customer_key
. p sa r l o e d sr u e c p t_ _ k k e e y y c c u u s s t t o o m m e e r r _ _ i n d ame INDUSTRY_GROUP INDUSTRY
. . . industry_group_key industry_group_key
. . order_dollars . . i p n r d im us a t r r y y _ _ i k n e d y ustry i i n n d d u u s s t t r r y y _ _ k co e d y e
.
industry_name
.
.
.
CUSTOMER INDUSTRY_GROUP INDUSTRY
customer_customer_ customer_ industry_ industry_ industry_ primary_ industry_ industry_ industry_
key id name group_key group_key key industry key code name
2012 C771 Company C 100 100 901 Primary 901 B404 Manufacturing
100 902 Not Primary 902 B492 Services
Figure 9-10 An attribute bridge table

=== PAGE 238 ===

Chapter 9 Multi-Valued Dimensions and Bridges 211
III
traP
and services. To represent this state of affairs, a group is set up in the industry_group table with
an industry_group_key value of 100. The table for industry_group_key 100 has two rows; one
has an industry_key value of 901, the other has an industry_key value of 902. These refer to
manufacturing and services in the industry table. In the company table, the row for Company
C simply references the group.
This approach provides maximum analytic flexibility. Unlike the flattened solution, it
can accommodate groups of any size. In addition, it is easy to use an industry name to filter
or group query results, simply by joining together the customer, industry_group, and
industry tables. As before, the presence of the bridge will require additional work when
loading the schema. The ETL process must detect and manage groupings. Groups with one
member will be necessary for companies that have only one industry.
TIP Compared to a solution that simplifies multi-valued attributes, using a bridge table offers increased
flexibility and simplifies reporting challenges.
Just as the benefits of the attribute bridge table mirror those of the dimension bridge
table, so do the other impacts. It will be necessary to avoid double-counting and to consider
the ramifications of changed data; it may also be necessary to work around the limitations
of software products that will not tolerate a many-to-many relationship.
Double-Counting
When a query joins a dimension table to a bridged outrigger as well as a fact table, facts
may be double-counted. This situation is sometimes called for but is also dangerous.
Anyone who does not take care when aggregating the facts may produce erroneous results.
To understand this possibility, think about Company C once more. Through the bridge,
it is linked to two rows in the industry table. You can see this quite clearly in Figure 9-10. If
you were to join these tables together, the SQL would look like this:
SELECT
customer.customer_name,
industry.industry_name
FROM
customer, industry_group, industry
WHERE
customer.industry_group_key = industry_group.industry_group_key AND
industry_group.industry_key = industry.industry_key;
When this query is executed, the result set will contain two rows for Company C:
CUSTOMER_NAME INDUSTRY_NAME
============= ==============
Company C Manufacturing
Company C Services
2 rows selected.

=== PAGE 239 ===

212 PART III Dimension Design
This occurs because the join conditions result in two industry matches for Company C; the
RDBMS dutifully repeats company row once for each match.
Now consider what happens if a fact table is added to this query. Suppose Company C
placed a $10,000 order that appears in the order_facts table. Adding the fact table to the
query looks like this:
SELECT
customer.customer_name,
industry.industry_name,
sum( order_dollars )
FROM
order_facts, customer, industry_group, industry
WHERE
order_facts.customer_key = customer.customer_key AND
customer.industry_group_key = industry_group.industry_group_key AND
industry_group.industry_key = industry.industry_key
GROUP BY
customer_name, industry_name
In order to process this query, the RDBMS will repeat the $10,000 order for each related
industry.
CUSTOMER_NAME INDUSTRY_NAME SUM(ORDER_DOLLARS)
============= ============== ==================
Company C Manufacturing 10,000
Company C Services 10,000
2 rows selected.
In some cases, this double-counting is just what is needed. For example, it is easy to
produce a report that totals order dollars by industry. Once again, however, there is the
danger that someone will misuse this information, constructing a grand total.
Primary Member and Hiding the Bridge
If it is possible to identify a single, primary member of each group, the bridge can be hidden
from inexperienced users, while still providing limited access to the bridged attribute. This is
achieved by adding a flag to the group table indicating the primary member of the group. A
view or similar mechanism is used to hide all but the primary member from inexperienced
users. Only trained developers will receive full access to the bridged solution.
The example from Figure 9-10 already bears the features necessary to implement such
a scheme. Notice that the bridge table industry_group contains a column called primary_
industry. For each group, only one row will have this flag set to the value “Primary.” When
the industry_group bridge is used to link the customer and industry tables, filtering for the
value “Primary” will guarantee a single match. Every customer has exactly one primary
industry. The same effect can be achieved by placing a primary_industry column in the
customer table.

=== PAGE 240 ===

Chapter 9 Multi-Valued Dimensions and Bridges 213
III
traP
TIP When an attribute bridge is employed, any query involving the outrigger risks the possibility of
double-counting. This risk can be minimized by using a flag to isolate a single member for each
group; this can be used to constrain the view of the schema presented to inexperienced users.
When a report is required that factors in the variety of industries in which a company
participates, trained developers will be called on to do the work. With unfettered access to
the bridged solution, only they will be able to produce these impact reports. Measures may
also be required to ensure that an end user who receives such a report will not have the
ability to press a button for a grand total.
NOTE Business intelligence products that generate SQL queries can be hampered by designs in which
there are more than one way to relate tables. Advice for handling this complication is provided in
Chapter 16, “Design and Business Intelligence.”
The Impact of Changes
As in any snowflaked situation, the presence of an attribute bridge will require careful
attention to the impact of changes in source data. Type 2 changes in particular require
careful scrutiny. Changes to the outrigger, the groupings, or the dimension itself may have
ripple effects that impact other group members.
The Impact of Changes to the Outrigger As you learned in Chapter 7, snowflake designs
require extra vigilance on the part of ETL developers. If an outrigger undergoes a type 2
slow change, it will most likely be appropriate for any associated dimension rows to do the
same. In addition, it may be necessary to contemplate changes in group membership.
For example, a change to an industry classification may be handled by using the
standard methods. A type 1 change causes little concern; the outrigger is simply updated.
If, however, the change is handled as type 2, then every company referring to the changed
industry is affected, as are the associated groups. For example, if “Services” is redesignated
as the more descriptive “Financial Services,” and this is handled as a type 2 change, a new
row will be generated in the outrigger table. To associate this value with Company C for
future facts, while leaving prior facts associated with the old value, it will be necessary to
create a new version of Company C. This new version of Company C will be associated with
a new set of rows in the group table for “financial services” and “manufacturing.”
If a new version of Company C is not created in this manner, then the type 2 change to
the industry will not be properly reflected when studying facts. For example, taking a shortcut
by simply updating group 100 with the new key for the financial services industry effectively
wipes out the old designation’s association with previously recorded facts. Usually, if a type 2
change occurs in an outrigger, this is not the desired behavior.
TIP Type 2 changes in an outrigger will require type 2 changes in the dimension and new groups in the
bridge table. These can also be supplemented with time stamps, if desired.
As with the dimension bridge, the story does not end here. Changes to group membership
may also require attention. In this case, a simple change to one member may have a ripple
effect that impacts multiple rows in the dimension table and the bridge.

=== PAGE 241 ===

214 PART III Dimension Design
The Impact of Changes to Group Membership Although they are represented through
an outrigger and bridge, it is important to keep in mind that these structures are all used to
accommodate the multi-valued attributes of the dimension table. The multi-valued attribute
can be thought of as part of the dimension itself, even though it is implemented as a bridge
and outrigger. If there is a change in the multi-valued attribute, it can be treated as type 1 or
type 2. A type 1 change is a simple matter of updating a group key in the dimension table,
but a type 2 change is more complicated. It will require a type 2 change in the dimension,
along with the establishment of a new group in the bridge table.
For example, if Company C leaves the services industry and enters the insurance
industry, it will be necessary to change its associations with the outrigger table. As a type 1
response, this may be handled by replacing the customer’s industry_group_key with one
that represents the new combination of industries.
A type 2 response to this change is more involved. The previously existing combination
of industries must be preserved and linked to any previously recorded facts linked with
Company C. In the dimension table, Company C must undergo a type 2 response; a new
row will be inserted with the new group key. In documenting the dimension table, it is
useful to flag the group_key as a type 2 attribute, in order to signal to developers that any
change to a company’s mix of industries will require a new row.
TIP In cases where the history of changes to group membership is to be maintained, any change to a
group will require creating a row in the dimension table that refers to the revised grouping.
This concept is difficult for many practitioners to understand. If you have trouble with
it, you can think of it this way: the group represented in the bridge and outrigger is itself a
characteristic of the dimension. If the group undergoes a change, the thing represented by
the dimension has changed.
Although some developers like to time-stamp the rows in the attribute bridge table,
observe that a time stamp on the dimension table itself is sufficient. It captures the period
of time during which the particular grouping was in effect for the dimension row. Placing
time stamps in the bridge table does not add any information. Moreover, it now requires a
separate group for each company that participates in the same set of industries. Time-
stamping bridge table rows usually only makes sense for dimension bridge tables, as in the
previous section.
The Impact of Changes to the Dimension Last, the dimension table itself may have to
respond to changes in source data. In the case of a type 2 change, the new “version” will
have a new surrogate key. If the multi-valued attributes have not changed, the new row can
reuse the same group_key. For example, Company C may undergo a type 2 slow change to
information unrelated to its industry. This causes a new row to be inserted in the customer
table for Company C, with a new surrogate key. Company C is still in the same mix of
industries, so the new row in the dimension table can refer to the same group of industries.
Other Impacts of the Attribute Bridge
Because they are usually described as “group” tables, bridge tables cause all kinds of confusion
when the multi-valued attribute to be bridged is itself a group. Keep focused on the concept of
bridging to work though this kind of design challenge. It may also be necessary to resolve the

=== PAGE 242 ===

Chapter 9 Multi-Valued Dimensions and Bridges 215
III
traP
many-to-many relationship between dimension table and bridge if you have software products
that will not acknowledge this kind of relationship.
When an Outrigger Represents Groups The word “group” has been used to describe the
bridge table in these examples, because it is used to bundle a set of attributes into a group.
Don’t allow this terminology to confuse you. The bridge table is an association table, linking
together the things on either side of it. This will help you through situations in which the
multi-valued attribute is itself a group. For example, an employee dimension may be linked
to an outrigger representing employee groups. These groups may represent committees,
unions, or other associations. The groups are represented by an outrigger. The bridge
associates each employee with the groups of which she is a member.
TIP When the outrigger is a group, try not to use the word “group” to describe the bridge. Doing so will
lead to confusion.
The standard bridge table caveats apply when multi-valued attributes are real-world
groups. Any employee may be a member of more than one group. If groups are brought
into the query, the employee will be double-counted. This may or may not be desired, and
controls will need to be put in place to mitigate the risk of double-counting. ETL developers
will have their work cut out for them, and it will be necessary to plan how source changes
will impact each component of the final design.
Folding the Outrigger into the Bridge If there are only one or two multi-valued attributes,
the outrigger table may be deemed unnecessary. The attributes can be placed in the bridge
table, simplifying the configuration. For example, the industry table in Figure 9-10 can be
eliminated by placing the industry code and name directly into the industry_group table.
This approach will reduce the number of tables and joins in the solution. Industry
names will be stored redundantly, but this is a common feature of dimension tables. It will
be necessary to index the table appropriately, and also to take care that industry names
appear identically each time they repeat.
Resolving the Many-to-Many Relationship An attribute bridge table usually shares a many-
to-many relationship with the dimension table it supports. As mentioned earlier in this chapter,
many tools cannot abide such relationships. Although it is possible to design, build, and use a
design like this, the relationship may get in the way of optimal configuration of the database or
business intelligence tool, and some modeling tools may not be able to represent it.
In these cases, the relationship can be resolved in two ways. The first option is to break
the bridge table down into two tables: a table with one row for each group, and a membership
table. The membership table serves as an intersect between the group and the outrigger,
resolving the many-to-many relationship in the same way that the dimension bridge was
resolved in Figure 9-7. The group table will have exactly one column, and its content will
consist entirely of key values. An example appears in Figure 9-11.
Here, the many-to-many relationship between customer and industry grouping has
been resolved by altering the group table. In this design, the table has one row for each
group. Each row consists of a single column, identifying the group. The set of industries
that associates with the group is now captured in group_membership, which looks exactly
like the original bridge table.

=== PAGE 243 ===

216 PART III Dimension Design
ORDER_FACTS
CUSTOMER
day_key
customer_key customer_key
product_key customer_id INDUSTRY_GROUP
salesrep_key
. customer_name INDUSTRY
.
. industry_group_key industry_group_key
.
order_dollars . industry_key
. .
. industry_code
.
industry_name
.
.
.
GROUP_MEMBERSHIP
This table has industry_group_key
only one industry_key
column! primary_industry
Figure 9-11 Resolving the many-to-many relationship
TIP If you have a software product that will not allow a many-to-many relationship, you can create an
intersect table to resolve it. It looks silly, but it works.
The industry_group table in this example is entirely redundant. All information is
present in the group_membership table. If you were to look at its content, it would be
nothing more than a sequence of integers. Nevertheless, this design will satisfy tools that
require a primary key–foreign key relationship to drive each join.
Another way to resolve the many-to-many relationship is to remove the group key from
the dimension table and replace the bridge with a simple intersect table. Each row in the
intersect table contains foreign keys that refer to a row in the dimension and a row in the
outrigger. With industry groups, for example, the customer table and industry table are
linked by an intersect table that contains a customer_key and industry_key. No group key is
present in the customer table. The intersect table in this solution may grow larger than the
one in Figure 9-11, since groupings cannot be not reused by more than one customer.
Bridge as Fact Table Because it consists primarily of foreign keys, a bridge table bears a
strong resemblance to a fact table. Although it contains no facts, it serves the same purpose:
capturing the relationship between attributes in the related tables. In Figure 9-10, industry_
group resembles a fact table; it contains multiple key references to other tables. This
resemblance is even stronger for the group_membership table in Figure 9-11, where the
many-to-many relationship is resolved.
NOTE There is such a thing as a factless fact table, and the concept is fully explored in Chapter 12.
Many dimensionally aware software products will identify bridge tables as fact tables. If
they contain allocation factors or flags, these may be identified as degenerate dimensions.
It is possible to argue the pros and cons of referring to a bridge table as a fact table, but it

=== PAGE 244 ===

Chapter 9 Multi-Valued Dimensions and Bridges 217
III
traP
would be an exercise in semantics only. Regardless of what you call it, the bridge table
serves its purpose. There is, however, one significant consideration.
If you choose to call the bridge a fact table, or if your toolset makes that choice for you,
you will need to relax a restriction that was introduced in Chapter 4. As you may recall, that
chapter explored the consequences of joining two fact tables together. Because this kind of
query can result in a Cartesian product, or double-counting, Chapter 4 cautioned not to do
it, and instead recommended following drill-across procedures.
As you have seen in this chapter, a bridge table exploits this same Cartesian effect in a
useful and powerful way. To call it a fact table, then, will require making an exception to
the rule not to join fact tables. When one of the fact tables is a bridge, the join is essential
and the Cartesian product is intended.
Summary
This chapter has provided tools to address real-life complexity that cannot fit within the
traditional one-to-many relationship between dimension table and fact table. A quick recap
of the primary lessons:
• When a fact must refer to more than one instance of a dimension, it may be
possible to simplify the many-to-many relationship into multiple one-to-many
relationships.
• This simplification may be less than satisfying, because it makes several types of
reporting more difficult and only supports a fixed number of dimension values.
• A bridge table allows a fact table row to be associated with any number of
dimension rows, and keeps the reporting simple.
• The bridge table makes it very easy to double count facts, so access and usage must
be carefully controlled.
• A bridge may contain an allocation factor or be supplemented by a simplified
relationship that isolates a single instance in a primary role.
• The many-to-many relationship introduced by the bridge can be resolved via an
intersect table if required by your toolset.
• The presence of a bridge makes it necessary to think carefully about the implications
of slow changes, not only to attributes but also to relationships.
• An attribute bridge works the same way as a dimension bridge but is placed between
a dimension table and an outrigger.
• Some tools identify bridge tables as fact tables because they carry multiple foreign
keys. This is fine, but be sure that the tool does not decide to drill across.
• Slow change considerations impact bridged solutions in interesting ways. A type 2
change can have a ripple effect that will impact multiple rows in multiple tables.
This is not the end of the story on the powerful but dangerous bridge table. The next
chapter will show you how a hierarchy bridge can be used to represent a recursive relationship
among dimension members, allowing facts to be rolled up or down to any level in a ragged
hierarchy.

=== PAGE 245 ===

218 PART III Dimension Design
Further Reading
Bridge tables are complicated but powerful. If you are still struggling with any of the concepts
in this chapter, it may help to see other examples. Here are some places you will find them:
Multi-Valued Dimensions
• In a health care example, Kimball and Ross describe the use of a bridge table to
associate a billing fact table with multiple diagnoses. This allows the construction
of an impact report illustrating total costs associated with any given diagnosis. This
example also contains an allocation factor. See Chapter 13 of The Data Warehouse
Toolkit, Second Edition (Wiley, 2002).
• The possibility of time-stamping changes to group membership in a dimension
bridge table was suggested but not illustrated. For an example, see the earlier
referenced health care scenario from Kimball and Ross. Although the time stamp is
not pictured in the example, it is described in the text. It should be obvious that to
maintain the time stamp it will be necessary to have a separate group for each
patient who has the same set of diagnoses.
• Building aggregates to summarize within a bridged dimension can be risky. It is
important to consider how to summarize the data appropriately, how double-counting
will be eliminated, and what the resulting aggregate actually describes. I deal with this
topic in Chapter 8 of Mastering Data Warehouse Aggregates (Wiley, 2006).
Multi-Valued Dimension Attributes
• In Chapter 8 of The Data Warehouse Toolkit, Kimball and Ross use a bridge to
associate multiple skills with each employee in an employee dimension table.
• In the same example, Kimball and Ross explore an alternative not discussed in this
book: the creation of a single attribute that concatenates the multiple values. This
solution is effective when used with SQL substring functions to search for particular
values but cannot be used to group results for an impact report.
• Kimball and Ross also show how an attribute bridge can be used to associate
multiple account holders with an account dimension in Chapter 9 of The Data
Warehouse Toolkit.